Purpose of study

Mathematics is a creative and highly inter-connected discipline that has been developed
over centuries, providing the solution to some of history’s most intriguing problems. It is
essential to everyday life, critical to science, technology and engineering, and necessary
for financial literacy and most forms of employment. A high-quality mathematics education
therefore provides a foundation for understanding the world, the ability to reason
mathematically, an appreciation of the beauty and power of mathematics, and a sense of
enjoyment and curiosity about the subject.

Aims
The national curriculum for mathematics aims to ensure that all pupils:

* become fluent in the fundamentals of mathematics, including through varied and
frequent practice with increasingly complex problems over time, so that pupils develop
conceptual understanding and the ability to recall and apply knowledge rapidly and
accurately.

* reason mathematically by following a line of enquiry, conjecturing relationships and
generalisations, and developing an argument, justification or proof using mathematical
language

* can solve problems by applying their mathematics to a variety of routine and nonroutine problems with increasing sophistication, including breaking down problems into
a series of simpler steps and persevering in seeking solutions.

Mathematics is an interconnected subject in which pupils need to be able to move fluently
between representations of mathematical ideas. The programme of study for key stage 3
is organised into apparently distinct domains, but pupils should build on key stage 2 and
connections across mathematical ideas to develop fluency, mathematical reasoning and
competence in solving increasingly sophisticated problems. They should also apply their
mathematical knowledge in science, geography, computing and other subjects.

Decisions about progression should be based on the security of pupils’ understanding and
their readiness to progress to the next stage. Pupils who grasp concepts rapidly should be
challenged through being offered rich and sophisticated problems before any acceleration
through new content in preparation for key stage 4. Those who are not sufficiently fluent
should consolidate their understanding, including through additional practice, before
moving on.

Information and communication technology (ICT)
Calculators should not be used as a substitute for good written and mental arithmetic. In
secondary schools, teachers should use their judgement about when ICT tools should be
used.

Spoken language
The national curriculum for mathematics reflects the importance of spoken language in
pupils’ development across the whole curriculum – cognitively, socially and linguistically.
The quality and variety of language that pupils hear and speak are key factors in
developing their mathematical vocabulary and presenting a mathematical justification,
argument or proof. They must be assisted in making their thinking clear to themselves as
well as others and teachers should ensure that pupils build secure foundations by using
discussion to probe and remedy their misconceptions.

Attainment targets
By the end of key stage 3, pupils are expected to know, apply and understand the matters,
skills and processes specified in the relevant programme of study.