Purpose of study
A high-quality science education provides the foundations for understanding the world
through the specific disciplines of biology, chemistry and physics. Science has changed
our lives and is vital to the world’s future prosperity, and all pupils should be taught
essential aspects of the knowledge, methods, processes and uses of science. Through
building up a body of key foundational knowledge and concepts, pupils should be
encouraged to recognise the power of rational explanation and develop a sense of
excitement and curiosity about natural phenomena. They should be encouraged to
understand how science can be used to explain what is occurring, predict how things will
behave, and analyse causes.

Aims
The national curriculum for science aims to ensure that all pupils:
* develop scientific knowledge and conceptual understanding through the specific
disciplines of biology, chemistry and physics

* develop understanding of the nature, processes and methods of science through
different types of science enquiries that help them to answer scientific questions about
the world around them

* are equipped with the scientific knowledge required to understand the uses and
implications of science, today and for the future.

Scientific knowledge and conceptual understanding
The programmes of study describe a sequence of knowledge and concepts. While it is
important that pupils make progress, it is also vitally important that they develop secure
understanding of each key block of knowledge and concepts in order to progress to the
next stage. Insecure, superficial understanding will not allow genuine progression: pupils
may struggle at key points of transition (such as between primary and secondary school),
build up serious misconceptions, and/or have significant difficulties in understanding
higher-order content.

Pupils should be able to describe associated processes and key characteristics in
common language, but they should also be familiar with, and use, technical terminology
accurately and precisely. They should build up an extended specialist vocabulary. They
should also apply their mathematical knowledge to their understanding of science,
including collecting, presenting and analysing data. The social and economic implications
of science are important but, generally, they are taught most appropriately within the wider
school curriculum: teachers will wish to use different contexts to maximise their pupils’
engagement with and motivation to study science.

The principal focus of science teaching in key stage 3 is to develop a deeper
understanding of a range of scientific ideas in the subject disciplines of biology, chemistry
and physics. Pupils should begin to see the connections between these subject areas and
become aware of some of the big ideas underpinning scientific knowledge and
understanding. Examples of these big ideas are the links between structure and function in
living organisms, the particulate model as the key to understanding the properties and
interactions of matter in all its forms, and the resources and means of transfer of energy as
key determinants of all of these interactions. They should be encouraged to relate
scientific explanations to phenomena in the world around them and start to use modelling
and abstract ideas to develop and evaluate explanations.

Pupils should understand that science is about working objectively, modifying explanations
to take account of new evidence and ideas and subjecting results to peer review. Pupils
should decide on the appropriate type of scientific enquiry to undertake to answer their
own questions and develop a deeper understanding of factors to be taken into account
when collecting, recording and processing data. They should evaluate their results and
identify further questions arising from them.

‘Working scientifically’ is described separately at the beginning of the programme of study,
but must always be taught through and clearly related to substantive science content in the
programme of study. Teachers should feel free to choose examples that serve a variety of
purposes, from showing how scientific ideas have developed historically to reflecting
modern developments in science.

Pupils should develop their use of scientific vocabulary, including the use of scientific
nomenclature and units and mathematical representations.

Spoken language
The national curriculum for science reflects the importance of spoken language in pupils’
development across the whole curriculum – cognitively, socially and linguistically. The
quality and variety of language that pupils hear and speak are key factors in developing
their scientific vocabulary and articulating scientific concepts clearly and precisely. They
must be assisted in making their thinking clear, both to themselves and others, and
teachers should ensure that pupils build secure foundations by using discussion to probe
and remedy their misconceptions.

Attainment targets
By the end of key stage 3, pupils are expected to know, apply and understand the matters,
skills and processes specified in the relevant programme of study.